---
layout: post
title: "Am I Here?"
draft: true
description: "A seemingly ironic way to use a practiced habit to increase your ability to be present in the moment"
category: [Dog Walking Deep Thoughts]
tags: [meditation]
---

## A Beautiful Sunny Day
I'm getting frustrated at my dog as we are taking a walk. She'd doing nothing unusual. Our walks are for her to 
read and write her pee-mail. I was in an altered state (low grade anger). I know that now, but on this day, 
I did not know that yet.

After realizing I was getting myself worked up, I started some breath work as we continued our walk. The
breathing stopped the internal escalation, but the baseline irritation remained.

A bit later, as I was working through what was up, it occurred to me that I was angry. It was undirected, but there.
I'm aware that my daydreaming often leads to unfulfilled desires, and provides low-grade dopamine fixes. My next
thought was to wonder, "What is this anger doing for me?"

I was not aware of any reason to be angry, and it occurred to me that I really didn't need this anger. I then thought
to myself "I don't want to be angry."

Coincidentally, the first thought came to me as I took a breath in (I was still doing the breath work).
The second thought as I was breathing out. It happens that I finished letting my breath out as I finished thinking
"I don't want to be angry." The mental shift in my brain was immediate. Like something moved. The anger was 
gone.

That state I was in, low grade undirected anger, falls on the spectrum of Disassociated Identify Disorder. 
Another example, you arrived at a desired destination, but don't remember how you got there.

I think of the different parts of my brain as nodes or voices. Those nodes co-exist and typically communicate with 
each other. When one part is loud (e.g., anger), other parts cannot hear each other (electricity in a meat bag). 
In a sense, when you are in the mode, you are not all there.

## Who's the "you" here? 

Have you had the opportunity to experience an emotion strongly, but not so strongly that you lose your ability to 
/observe/ you are experiencing that strong emotion?

If I model "anger" as a voice / node in my brain (by the way, its name is Fred). Your ability to self-observe is
yet another node. When you have strong reactions, often the so-called executive function gets pushed to the side.

At first, you experience an emotion. At some point, that emotion takes over, and it has you; one part of the brain is 
talking so loud (sending electrical signals along your neurons) that the other parts cannot hear each other.

## How?

Was it taking a breath out in a particular manner that helped reset to a different homeostasis in my brain? Maybe,
deep breathing can do that, [Wim Hof breathing](https://www.wimhofmethod.com/) does it (I've measured it using 
a [Muse 2](https://choosemuse.com/). It certainly is possible that the shift was primarily based on regular anatomical 
functioning. (E.g., breathing in through your nose activates the emotional nodes of your brain, making it more likely 
you'll remember wha you hear as you breathe in - but not for mouth breathing.)

Was it that my as I regained an ability to self regulate? As I kept ruminating on it, I made less space for anger 
to keep dominating the conversation? Before I started doing that, I assumed that I was interpreting my current 
experience as "normal." It wasn't. But as soon as my ability to self assess started gaining a foothold in my
electric meat bag, the other state of being (low grade anger), was slowly shut down. The breath at the end was the
end of a longer process, rather than the cause of the result.

## Can I discover this sooner?

In my [last blog](https://schuchert.github.io/dog%20walking%20deep%20thoughts/2022/02/20/MechanicsOfSettingIntentions.html),
I talk about how setting an intention before meditation might more easily get inserted into your subconscious. That
came to mind during all of this, and what occurred to me is that asking myself "Am I here?" is a good way to give
my executive function a chance to kick in. 

So I've added that habit. Throughout the day, the question "Am I here?" comes to mind. Sometimes it comes up during 
a day-dream, and often I stop the day-dreaming. When I do this, I'm actively denying myself the dopamine provided by 
that day-dream. Do that enough, and your brain will find other ways to get its fix. 

I hope that when it does, I'll ask myself if I'm here if that day-dream less and working through an idea and more 
about some kind of hero-fantasy, where I am of course the star.
